Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricard Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Joshua Nobi. He is
Professor of Philosophy and Linguistics and Psychology at Yale
University. A lot of his recent research has been
concerned with the impact of people's moral judgments on
their intuitions about questions that might initially appear to
be entirely independent of morality. But as we're going
to talk about today, apparently they are not. So
Josh, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Thanks Ricardo. It's really good to be here.
So I would like to start by asking you
about experimental philosophy. So what is experimental philosophy? Really?
And how does it differ from, let's say armchair
philosophy?
Yeah. Awesome question. So experimental philosophy is the field
that started around 20 years ago in the beginning
of the 21st century. And it's a field that
really is the merger of two different things. So
on one hand, it uses these methods that are
the methods we see all the time in psychology.
So we run experiments that very much look like
psychology experiments and use the same statistics, the same
kinds of experimental designs that you see all the
time in the field of psychology. But at a
kind of theoretical level, it's really very closely connected
to philosophy. So there's this tradition in philosophy, going
back thousands of years of thinking about, for example,
thought experiments where if you open up some work
from Plato, you'll see him thinking. OK, let's talk
about the concept of justice. Um Now consider this
case, would you say that's justice? Now, what about
this, this justice and gradually trying to understand what
justice is by considering thought experiments of that type.
So experimental philosophy is a field that kind of
merges those two things. So it's a field that's
drawing on this very long tradition within philosophy of
trying to understand these concepts using this particular kind
of approach to understanding them and the methods that
we see in psychology of just running systematic experiments,
analyzing them using data and so forth. So what
you see in an experimental philosophy study is something
that might look a little bit like what Plato
is doing in some sense except for that instead
of um just seeing well, consider this case surely.
In that case, people would say this, it's we
say consider this, we recruited 1000 participants, they were
randomly assigned to conditions in a three by two
design. We analyzed what their responses were and we
can see that people's responses are affected by these
factors. Now we're trying to develop a deeper understanding
of what's going on within people's minds that shapes
those judgments, what's going on in human cognition that
makes them have the judgments they do.
But how does it differ from science? I mean,
if in terms of methodology, it seems so similar
to what we see across several different sciences, then
why isn't it uh also science? Why is it
still philosophy?
That's a great question. And I think that the
answer is that we should all think less about
that. So if you, if you look at what's
actually happening with this field of the experimental philosphy
experimental philosophy studies are just being published in the
same journals that or every other cognitive science um
kind of paper is being published in. So for
example, the journal Cognition, which is one of the
leading journals in the field of cognitive science, a
quantitative study of where experimental philosophy papers get published,
showed that one of the most common places to
publish them is cognition. And when you send a
paper to cognition, they don't do some special philosophy
way of thinking about it. They're just thinking about
it as a contribution to cognitive science. So it's
not as though there's some kind of sharp divide
that we really want to say we are not
scientists, we're philosophers and the things we're doing are
not contributions to science, they are contributions to philosophy,
which is something separate. But although there's no sharp
divide like that, I really feel like there is
an important difference that there really is something different
about what's going on. So if you think about,
for example, this field that's at the intersection of
psychology and economics in which people are trying to
study what's going on in people's minds that affects
their economic decision making. And there are people working
in that field who are psychologists and there are
people working in that field who are economists. I
mean, it's not like there are two separate fields.
I mean, there is a field of studying this
but still there's a difference that when an economist
studies those questions, it's different than when a psychologist
studies, those questions that economists are drawing this whole
theoretical tradition that they, when they were um grad
students, they were like studying real analysis and like
um microeconomic theory and and then they're bringing to
bear that whole tradition on these questions. I mean,
you think about what's going on in experimental philosophy,
I feel like you see something really similar that
it it might not be a rigid dichotomy between
what we're doing and what people outside of philosophy
are doing. But there's something really clear if you
open up one of these papers, you can tell
it's written by a philosopher that it's drawing on
this kind of really rich theoretical tradition that all
of us in philosophy have been steeped in from
our undergraduate to graduate school through all of the
um interactions we're having now in philosophy departments and
the research we're doing is really coming out of
that, that we've been thinking about Aristotle for decades.
And the study we're doing is very much influenced
by that whole tradition,
right? But I mean, I guess that this also
puts into perspective, the relationship between science and philosophy
because in many ways there, there's not and uh
there's uh there should, there should necessarily be a
strict division between the, let's say two fields of
knowledge. I mean, historically speaking, of course, science even
derived from philosophy. But nowadays, even when people try
to make a strict division and say that philosophy
is from the humanities, and then we have the
sciences which are two separate things. Uh It doesn't
have to be like that,
right? We I really strongly agree that a lot
of times experimental philosophy is presented as something new
as the it's kind of rebelling against the tradition
of philosophy. But I completely agree with what you
just said, it should be seen instead as something
old that if you look at um what was
going on in the 19th century in philosophy. When
you think about these figures like Karl Marx Friedrich,
Nietzsche Jon Stewart Mill, these people were very concerned
with empirical questions, questions about what human beings are
really like. And then they were trying to explore
all those empirical questions using all the methods that
were available at that time to explore those questions
and then there was kind of this new fangled
revolution against all of that, that people start to
say all that stuff that people traditionally did in
philosophy. That's not even philosophy, that's just science, philosophy.
Is this other thing that you can do from
your armchair without even um engaging with empirical data.
And I think that that revolution against the traditional
way of doing philosophy was just totally mistaken. There
was never anything wrong with the traditional way of
doing philosophy, that what those people were doing in
the 19th century was just totally right. And we
should just go back. It was the exactly the
right approach that we should have this met mode
of inquiry where we're not um distinguishing really strictly
between these different things. We're trying to go after
these questions with all the methods at our disposal.
And we're exploring questions that are kind of recognizably
philosophical. But we're exploring those questions by engaging with
all the empirical data we can get that will
help us answer them.
So after that introduction, let's get into some of
the topics you explore in your work. So first
of all, what is belief,
what is belief? But in the work that we've
done on this topic, what we're concerned with is
how ordinary people figure out what other people believe.
So, um there's something in our minds that allows
us to figure out what other people believe about.
So if I um am uh thinking about another
person, I might think. Um Even though I'm right
here in my office, she doesn't know that she
thinks that I'm at home. So she believes that
I'm at home. I know a question arises like,
uh about how to understand the concept how people
think about. So, here's what we thought about that.
Here's what we argue for, with regard to that
question that are more basic way of that human
beings make sense of why other people do the
things they do is not in terms of what
they believe in terms of what they know. So
the normal way of thinking about things is that
I would just think, ok, you know, I'm right
now, I'm in my office. Does she know that
or not? And that way of thinking about things,
thinking about what other people know is something that's
really fundamental and so fundamental that it's very much
shared with our other, with other primates and presumably
with our common ancestor, with those other primates and
something that's just totally automatic. It, it as soon
as you see someone else and you're seeing like
what they're looking at and what they're not looking
at, you immediately are aware of which things they
know and which things they don't know. And then
the suggestion we had is that this ability that
human beings have to think that other people could
believe something that's not true. That should be seen
as this fancy extra ability like something that only
human beings have, other primates don't have it. So
this suggestion, we're making a sort of a reversal
of the way cognitive scientists have often thought about
this. The cognitive scientists have often thought the most
basic aspect of how we make sense of other
people's minds is by thinking about what they believe
and what they want. And then we're suggesting, no,
it's the most basic way of thinking about it
is in terms of what people know and what
they want and then what they believe is when
you're doing that you're doing, like, just a very
sophisticated thing that goes beyond the way people normally
understand each other.
But how should we go about distinguishing between belief
and knowledge? I mean, what does really count as
knowledge?
Oh. So, um, maybe a helpful thing to think
about in terms of what things really come to
his knowledge is to understand that what knowledge is,
is not just the same thing as beliefs that
happen to be true. Mhm. So, suppose there's an
object and it's aimed at particular place and then
the object is like moving all around while I'm
not looking at it, it's moving all, it's moving
here, it's moving there and then just randomly it
happens to move back to the exact place that
it was when I was, when I was looking
at it, then if I hadn't been looking at
it this whole time, I might believe it's in
this place and it really is in this place.
But I don't know, it's in this place. It's
just, I was just lucky. So, in a case
like that, you might think, I believe it. And
it's true, but I don't actually know it. So,
the, the key idea now that we were introducing
is that, um, that this ability to figure out
which things people know and which they don't know,
this is something shared with our, with other primates
and this ability to figure out what things people
believe is not. So suppose you do it um
this task now with a chimpanzee. So um I
put something in this, in this place and you're
watching me put it in this place and then
you look away. So just try it out so
our viewers can see. OK. Can you look away
for a second? Yeah. OK. So now while you're
looking at it just stays in this place and
now it's in this place, you can't, you can't
see it. Now turn back. OK. Now once you
turn back, I as the other, um as a
chimpanzee would expect that when you're trying to get
it, say it's a piece of food that you'd
look here and you wouldn't look here but not
consider a different kind of case. So suppose I
put the object in this place and then you
look away. Now, while you're looking late, let's try,
can you demonstrate while you're looking at the object
moves all around, it's moving, it's moving, it's here,
it's here. Ok. Now, look back. So now just
by chance it happened to end up in the
same place that it was when you looked away.
Another question is where does the chimpanzee expect you
to go when you're trying to find it? And
the answer is chimpanzees are just completely a chance.
They think it's totally random which place you go.
So that seems to indicate chimpanzees can figure out
which things you know, but they can't figure out
which things you believe, you believe it's here, but
you don't know it's here. So they have no
idea where you think it is.
Yeah. And from the perspective of cognitive science, what
is more basic representations of knowledge or representations of
belief? And that at least what we suggest. And
this is in a paper that's where the lead
author is, Jonathan Phillips is that the more basic
thing is knowledge. And in that way, we're sort
of going against what a lot of cognitive scientists
have traditionally thought like that. A lot of cognitive
scientists traditionally thought if you want to understand basically
how I make sense of your mind, the most
basic thing to understand is how I figure out
what you think. And then our suggestion is people
can figure out what you think, but that's not
the thing they're using most generally. Maybe they use
that in cases where something weird is happening. And
so they can't use their more basic approach and
the more basic approach is to figure out what,
you know. So I don't know if this will
be a helpful example. But um, I, if we're
going to your home and we're just walking on
the street, I immediately have this sense that, you
know, where your home is and then my ability
to think about the fact that you know, where
your home is. So we're gonna go to the
right place, doesn't rely in any way on my
ability to attribute beliefs to you, right?
So, uh uh and le let's now talk a
little bit about uh causal judgments and norm violations
because you've done some work on that. So do
norm violations interact with causal judgments. And if so
how, yeah, so a lot of studies show that
um when you're judging whether one thing caused another
thing, then people tend to think that people's judgments
about whether this cause that depend on whether they
think that this thing is right or wrong or
good or bad. So you, I'll just give an
example to explain it. So imagine that you're in
the philosophy department and the receptionist has a, has
some pens on her desk. So now, um the
there are like two pens on her desk and
the rule of the department is that administrative assistants
are allowed to take the pens, but professors are
not supposed to take pens from the desk, they're
just supposed to bring their own pens. So I
mentioned one day the administrative assistant and Professor Smith
are walking by the desk and they just each
take a pen. So the administrative assistant takes a
pen just like she's supposed to. And Professor Smith
also takes a pen even though she's totally not
supposed to and she's just completely violating this rule.
Now, after they've both done that, um, there's no
pens on the desk. And so when the receptionist
gets a call, she has a problem, she has
no pen to like, take down the message to
know who caused the problem. In that case, participants
overwhelmingly to say that the recept that the Professor
Smith caused the problem, but the administrative assistant did
not cause the problem. And then in that case,
they're making a causal judgment. They're just judging whether
one thing caused another, but their judgment about whether
something caused something else seems to be shaped in
some way by their judgments of which things are
right or wrong to do. And then over the
past few years, we've been doing all these different
kinds of research to explain why that's happened
and why does that happen?
Well, there are a number of different theories and
um it could turn out that our theory is
wrong, but the theory that we adopt is that
it depends is that people's moral judgments are shaping
which possibilities they think of. So in the case
that I just described what happened in the actual
world was that the administrative assistant took a pen
and Professor Smith took a pen. But you could
imagine other possibilities, what we call counter factuals. You
could just imagine other things that could have happened.
So one thing you could imagine is the administrative
assistant could have just not taken a pen, even
though there was no reason for her to do
that. And the professor could have taken a pen.
And then in that case, the problem wouldn't have
occurred. But you would tend not to think about
that possibility because why would the administrative system of
not taking that? And then another possibility you could
consider is, for example, the administrative system takes a
pen and the professor doesn't take a pen. In
that case, also, the problem wouldn't have occurred, but
there's just a much higher probability that you think
of that possibility, the possibility in which people do
what they're supposed to do. And so we developed
this theory according to that, which is science probabilities
to different thoughts. So if you mentioned different things,
you could possibly think, then there's a probability of
thinking certain things and a probability of other thinking
other things and they're different, there are different potential
probabilities and then the degree to which you end
up regarding certain things as causes can be defined
in it mathematically in terms of those probabilities. So
in the case that I just told you given
the exact way it works because there was a
higher probability of thinking about cases in which the
professor doesn't take a pen and in the case
in which the administrative assistant doesn't take a pen,
you would more say the professor across the public.
Mhm. Uh,
SO, uh, we're going to talk more about the
work you've been doing on, uh, how morality and
moral appraisals affect or at least influence how we
think. Uh, BUT, uh, I, I mean, let me
ask you another question to introduce a topic that
also we sort of related to that. So people
have this idea or concept of the true self.
So, what is that? What does that mean? Exactly.
Oh, yeah, it's a, it's a really good question.
Try to understand what it really is. So there's
a very straightforward sense of which it seems like
people have it though. Like, so for example, um,
suppose that, uh, you are faced with this conflict,
which is that you want to have, you, you're,
um, addicted to heroin and you want to have
some heroin, but also at the very time you
want to get clean and then there's this conflict
between you. Now suppose you end up yielding to
the temptation to do more heroin and then you
abandon the desire to get clean. A lot of
people would think that decision that you did chose,
it doesn't reflect what you really want deep down
inside something like you're betraying your true self. And
then by contrast, if you chose the opposite option,
if you said I'm going to, um, uh, just
not do this heroin, I'm gonna get clean and
I get a jug and I get back with,
if you did that, no one would say you're
betraying your true self because deep down inside what
you really wanted to do was to have no
heroin. So in that case, people have a very
clear intuition about which one is the thing that
your true self is calling you to it. And
then there's a much more difficult question, which is
what does that mean? Like what, what is it
that makes us think that one is the one
that's your true self,
right? Uh And I, and I mean, is it
that there are any universals when it comes to
how people think about the true self?
Well, we do find actually that there's something strikingly
systematic that you see across many different people and
many different cultures. And that is that when there's
a conflict between two different things. So part of
you is drawn toward one thing and part of
you is drawn to the other people show a
very striking tendency to think that the one person
you really are deep down inside the real you
is the thing that's to the thing that they
think is good. So in the case that I
just described, if you think that during heroin is
bad, you'd be less likely to think that that's,
that your real self. So if different people have
totally opposite views about what is good, then those
different people will have totally opposite views about who
you really are deep down inside. Like if, if
you're caught between A and B and some people
think A is the good thing and some people
think B is the good thing, the people who
think A is the good thing will say deep
down inside the real Ricardo is struggling toward A
and the other people who think B is the
good thing will think deep down in his true
self. The real Ricardo is the thing that's been
drawing him to be.
And what about the misanthrope specifically? Do they also
think that the true self is uh is good
or not?
Yeah. So some people have this tendency that they
think people are bad. So if you just ask
them on um explicit questions, like, do you agree
with the following statement? You just can't really trust
people, they're gonna do bad stuff to you, then
they say, yeah, people are terrible. So now the
question is they still think that the true self
is good. So in um some research that was
led by Julian Deres, we, we looked at that
question and what we did was um we told,
told participants about a story about someone who's caught
between two things. So they have a desire to
do the morally good thing and they have a
desire to do the morally bad thing. And then
participants were randomly assigned to one of two questions.
So one question is given that people are copying
these two things. Which one do you predict they'll
actually do if someone's copying these two things, you
know, what do you think he's gonna do? And
then it's pretty unsurprising the people who are very
low in misanthropy say he's gonna do the good
thing. And the people who are high in misanthropy
say he's gonna do the bad thing. But then
by contrast, we say, um OK, there are these
two things I'm not asking you which one he's
gonna do. I'm asking you which one is his
true self. Then the people who are low in
misanthropy and the people who are high in misanthropy
both say the true self is the one drawing
him toward what's good. So misanthropes think you're, they,
they still think deep down you're good. They just
think you're not gonna do the thing that your
true self is calling you to do.
But do we know why? That's the case? I
mean, why, even though they still think that the
true self is good, uh they don't expect that
people will behave in a good way. Why is
that?
That's really fascinating question. And it really gets to
a deep question of what this thing even is
like, what, what is it to say that someone
has a true self. It doesn't seem to be
something that we're using to predict what they're actually
going to do. It seems to be something else.
I think maybe this won't answer your question, but
maybe just to give a sense of what this
judgment is, it would be helpful to give an
example one of our studies. So this is a
study that was led by George Newman. And in
this study, participants were told about this guy Mark
and there were two different conditions in one condition.
Participants were told Mark as an evangelical preacher and
he travels around the world brings people this message
that homosexuality is a sin and you can be
redeemed from that sin through the power of Jesus.
If you pray, you can like rid yourself of
homosexuality. And then marcus' problem, which is that he
himself is actually gay. And so he himself is
really drawn to other men. And then he describes
this in his speeches and acknowledges it as part
of his own personal struggle. So there's a struggle
within Mark. Um He has desire to be with
other man and he's a belief that it's morally
wrong. So which part is his true self? In
that case, I just described liberal participants to tend
to say Marx, true yourself is the part that
um is being drawn to other men. And the
conservatives tend to say Mars yourself is the part
that believes that it's morally wrong. I know if
you can kind of feel that intuitively. But now
suppose we switch it. So now we're gonna say
America is this person who travels all around the
world, bringing to people this message that people of
all sexual orientations should be treated equally. And then
he teaches people techniques that they can use to
treat gay people with respect. But Mark himself has
a problem and the problem is that he himself
finds himself feeling disgusted by gay people. And then
he acknowledges this fully and just recognized it as
a part of his own personal struggle. So now
again, his emotions and his moral beliefs are are
out of um fighting against each other, but now
in the opposite direction. So this time, which do
people think it's, is his true self? Here, it's
reversed. The liberals tend to say is more a
belief that you should treat people with all sexual
orientations equally. That's his true self. If you could
just get rid of this disgust, then he'd be
able to more fully express the person, he was
all alone. And then the conservatives tend to say
that emotion of disgust, that is his true self.
And if you could get rid of the moral
belief, then you'd be able to express the person
he really is all about. So now we face
this question, which is the question that you just
posed, you know, how do we make sense of
what this thing is? It doesn't seem to be
something that people are using to predict what Mark
is going to do. It seems to be playing
some other role in their way of thinking about
who Mark really is.
But then, uh, people's own moral values influence how
they think about the true self. And what they
say is the true self of someone they are
evaluating.
Yeah, exactly. And people's moral beliefs affect that and
then it doesn't seem to be that they only
affects judgments about the true self, let's say of
a human being, they seem to also affect judgments
about the essence of other things other than human
beings. So say, there's some band you like and
now suppose the band has different albums over time.
See, their first album was really amazing. And then
by the third album they've, like, totally sold out
and then the, the band is just like, doing
some, like, corporate schlock to sell more records. Yeah.
I thought you could ask the question, like all
those different albums, which one reflects, like what this
band is really all about. Like the true essence
of this band. Then you get the same effect
that people say, whichever is the best one that's
what affects like the real essence of the band.
No one ever thinks, um, the schlocky corporate stuff.
That's what the band was really all about. And
then they were betraying their true essence in their
first album when they created this amazing music, we're
supposed to think about the essence of the United
States. So the United States has done various different
things. For example, there's maybe a lot of freedom,
but there's also a lot of racism. And then
you might ask the question, you know, what's the
real essence of the United States? What's the United
States really all about? And then different people have
different views about which things about the United States
are the good ones and which are the bad
ones. But people seem to think whichever is the
good thing about the United States. That's what the
United States is really all about. So this thing
that we see for judgments about the true self,
it seems like it arises for judgments about the
self, arises for like what you are really all
about, but not just because you're because of you,
because you're a human being, it also arises for
nations, for bands, for all sorts of different things.
Like if I write a philosophy paper and it
has different sections and some are good and some
are bad, whichever section you think is the good
one, you'll think that's the real heart of what
my paper is really all about.
And, uh, I mean, I asked you if uh
moral beliefs influence the way people think about the
true self of a particular somebody. So, but uh,
does it work also the other way around? I
mean, do beliefs about the true self influence moral
judgment. That's
a great question. We, we have some evidence in
recent work with Michael printing that seems to suggest
that, that they do. So, the basic idea would
be, um, suppose, for example, that, um someone is,
um, he's caught between two different kind of romantic
interests like a woman is trying to choose between
two different men. And then suppose you learn, she's
drawn to one and she's also drawn to the
other, but deep down in her truest heart, she's
more drawn to this one and less to that
one that makes people think that this one is
actually the good person that people think the thing
that your true self is drawing you toward. Probably
that thing is good. And it feels like a,
like a really fundamental kind of heuristic that people
use sometimes in their own decision making that, that
when they're trying to figure out what's right, they
seem to be drawn to the thought that whatever
their truest deepest self is pulling them toward, that
must really be the right thing. Mhm.
And I mean, do judgments moral judgments regarding uh
the goodness or the badness of someone's behavior, have
any influence in how we think about them being
happy or not, or if they deserve praise or
blame, that is uh thinking about a particular agent's
behavior in moral terms, also influence how we think
about it in terms of some other psychological dimensions
like happiness, praise blame. And so on,
we, we get these very strong effects for happiness.
So an obvious thought you might have about what
it is to be happy. Is it being happy?
It just means feeling really good all the time,
not feeling bad. And I don't know, thinking your
life is going well, this is about his mental
states that you have. But for some reason, we're
finding that people's moral judgments affect whether you see
someone's happy or not. So imagine two different cases.
So imagine this person who feels really good all
the time, doesn't feel bad and thinks her life
is going great. And the reason is she's like
a high school student who is um really uh
has close friends in her high school and is
like working to help the disadvantaged, like on her
spare time and it's a good relationship with her
parents and so forth. Then people think she's truly
happy but not consider a different person I met
with someone who's more like Regina George, the character
from mean girls. So she feels really good and
she doesn't feel bad and she thinks her life
is going great. And the reason is because she's
the most popular kid in the class. And whenever
anyone else tries to challenge her or something, she
just like insults them and demeans them and just
dominates everyone. She has no real friends, no real
interests doesn't really care about anything. And it's just
trying to like, get to the top of this
popularity contest, then people feel when you give that
case a little, I much more torn about whether
the person is happy. So a lot of people
seem to have this feeling like, well, there's clearly
a sense in which she's happy. You just said
she feels good. But on the other hand, they
feel like no, but there's some deeper sense of
when she doesn't feel happy at all in some
sense, what she has is not true happiness where
true happiness seems to be something that you can
laugh even if you're feeling pretty great.
Uh But uh I mean, when it comes to
happiness, this is, I guess a complicated concept, isn't
it the case that conceptions of happiness vary cross
culturally.
We don't find that in the studies that we've
done. So you work with Yang, we um why
we and she translated all of this into Chinese
and then just ran all these cases in um
in China with Chinese people. And then we find
exactly the same thing arising that people say the
person who's morally bad isn't really happy. And then,
and then tried it with Children. So um if
you imagine like just asking the same kind of
question to a four year old, and then we
find again the same thing, Children also show the
same effect. So overall, it seems like what, what's
going on is that this effect seems to be
not something that's just arising I don't know because
of certain weird idiosyncrasies of what's going on in
western culture, in the 20 twenties. It's something that
is in very young Children before they've had the
chance to kind of learn all the subtleties of
exactly how words are used. And it's something that
arises across very different cultures. It's a very good
question why it's happening, but it doesn't seem to
be happening because it's something more like about, um
kind of just uh certain books we happen to
have read or certain ways we happen to use
this one word.
Uh And I, I would like to ask you
now about uh folk morality. Do, do people, for
example, tend to believe in objective moral truths?
Yeah, that's a great question. So in, in philosophy,
there's been a really long and profound question uh
inquiry into the question are their moral truths objective?
Could there really be a fact of the matter
about some moral question? And within philosophy, there's some
people who think the answer is yes and some
people who think the answer is no. But typically
people on both sides of that dispute say that
ordinary folks think the answer is definitely yes. So
the people who say that the answer is yes,
they were defending the ordinary view and the people
who say the answer is no, say the ordinary
view is wrong. There aren't objective well truths in
the way people think they ordinarily are. But why
do people say that just try asking a few
people around you. And you'll find immediately that people
don't always say that their objective moral is pe
different people you ask will give you different answers
and different questions, the ways of asking the question
will give you different answers. It seems like what's
happening and you could see this. I think immediately
if you just asked a few friends is that
people regard this as a confusing question that they
think it's a difficult question to answer and they're
kind of drawn in competing directions. So we ran
a whole series of studies and that's what they
seem to show that um people are confused about
this. It's like difficult and de depending on various
things that you do, you can kind of push
people in very different directions.
But uh I, I mean, o of course, I
don't know if you controlled for these in those
studies but uh the way people think about morality
and moral proofs as being objective or not, this,
is it influence or do you know if it's
influenced in any way by uh political beliefs? For
example, I mean, beca because the there's this, sometimes
we hear this idea that uh conservative people when
compared to liberal people would believe more in objective
moral truths. But I, I don't know if that
has any scientific or experimental philosophical support to it
or
not. Yeah, that is true. So in studies by
this is not my own work. But in studies
by Louis SS, he finds this correlation that more
conservative people more believe in objective moral truths and
more liberal people less believe in objective moral truths.
So that's just a correlation. It doesn't mean that
the political beliefs are affecting the, um, the beliefs
about the nature of normality. It could be a
different way where there's some deeper fact about a
person and that affects your political beliefs and it
also just affects your beliefs about morality. But in
any case, you're totally right, though different people with
different political beliefs tend to have different beliefs about
whether they're objective morals.
Uh, AND so, but when it comes to moral
relativism, do we have any idea about how prevalent
it is among people and, uh, across different cultures?
I mean, is it that it's very common or
not? Yes. So in studies to address this question,
we try, um, uh, to test whether people are
moral relatives by giving them the, the following kind
of cases. So they're gonna be three different conditions.
And so imagine there's some person in, I don't
know, New Jersey and this person does something like,
for example, he murders his own child. And now
suppose that you say that what he did was
morally wrong. And then I say what he did
is totally fine. And then participants are asked the
question given that Ricardo and Josh said, opposite things
about this does one of them have to be
wrong, Ricardo or Josh or could it be that
neither of them is wrong? And then in that
case, participants overwhelmingly say one of us has to
be wrong. Ok. Now consider a different case, suppose
there's discrepancies in New Jersey, then he murders his
own child. And then I say that, um, what
that, what he did is morally wrong. And then
there's someone else in a completely different culture, say
this is the hunter gatherer living in the Amazon.
And then that person says what this person did
isn't wrong at all. It's totally fine. Then given
that I said this thing and this other person
from his other cultures said the opposite. Does one
of us have to be wrong? Or could we
both be right on that case, people are right
about at the midpoint of the scale. So in
that case, participants don't say definitely one of you
has to be wrong or definitely could be that
you're neither of you is wrong. They're kind of
like neither here nor there. Now consider a third
condition. That's like an even more distinct culture. So
ma that there are these extraterrestrial beings, they're called
the PS and the P tars don't have any
of the interest that we have. They're not, they
don't care about like love and friendship and like
um helping others. None of that, all they care
about is maximizing the total number of Pentagons in
the universe. And then, for example, if one of
them becomes too old and tired and sick to
accomplish this task, they just kill that and just
turn him into a Pentagon and then none of
them see anything wrong with that. No, I mentioned
that this person in New Jersey kills his own
child and I say that's really morally bad. And
one of the panthers says, no, it's totally fine.
There's nothing bad about it at all. Then in
that case, does one of us have to be
wrong me or the Panther or could it be
that neither of us is wrong in that kind
of case, participants tend to say neither of you
has to be wrong. So it's a little bit
unclear what to make of this and different um
philosophers have had very different thoughts about it, but
it seems to at least suggest there, there's something
that draws us toward thinking in a relativist way
as we start thinking about um judges who are
more and more different from each other. Mhm.
Uh So it seems that also that uh people
consistently make sense of moral events in terms of
agents and patients do, do we know why? That's
the case?
So right there, there's really important work, not, not
by me, that's indicating it a really fundamental aspect
of how people think about moral situations is that
there is kind of true rules, there's the role
of the agent and the role of the patient
So I don't know if um if the Russian
army killed some innocent people in a Ukrainian town,
then the Russian army would be the agent and
the innocent people who got killed will be the
patient. And then uh research on this topic has
explored these two rules, these fundamental rules and morality
and uh how things like that work. Like, for
example, some research seems to suggest that it's very
hard to see someone as occupying bulls ws like
in two different events. They, they would be hard
in the case. I just described to think that
for example, the um people would tend not to
think that those people were the victims of the
Russian army, but also they themselves are perpetrators who
harm other people within their towns, right? So then
the question arises, why does morality work like that?
Why do we have these two fundamental rules? And
one possible answer you could give is that it's
just because it's something about morality, morality is like
that. But at least what we suggested was may,
maybe it's not, maybe the reason that things work
that way is because it's something much more general
about human cognition, how the human mind works. There
people tend to think about agents and patients or
sometimes they're called agents and themes in general. And
some evidence from that comes from like the structure
of human language that if you think about um
which thing goes in the subject position of a
sentence and which thing goes in the object position
of the sentence? It it's, it's not random. It
always seems to be the agent and the patient.
So just to give you a sense of what
I mean, you know how we have the word,
for example. Um Great. So you couldn't say like
I broke his bone and that would mean like
that I was the one who caused the bone
to break or like John broke Fred's bone or
we could have like um hurt like John hurt
Fred. But no, I imagine we tried to create
a verb that's like the reverse of hurt. It's
called a Schmidt. And then John Schmidt uh Fred
Schmit did um John just means the same thing
as John hurt. Fred that no language has a
word that works like that and you can kind
of feel it immediately like that we could never
have that, that verb could never exist. So it
feels like there's this very basic connection we have
uh idea we have about agency and patient is
such that we're always gonna put the agent and
subject position and the patient or in this is
sometimes called the theme in the object position.
Mhm uh And since we're talking here about uh
folk philosophy, what tend to be people's ideas about
free will, I mean, is the belief in free
will, a human universal.
Well, it, it, it's really interesting that what you
find if you ask people in the United States
about free, well, like say we just looked around
here is that people find it confusing. So um
if you ask like folks right around here, if
I ask them certain kinds of questions, what I
get is that people would immediately recognize that that's
like a really confusing question and then they're like
torn in different directions. Some people would say one
thing, some people say another thing, a lot of
people would just openly admit that that's like a
really hard problem. So that like you said about
universality, a really question now is um is is
why why do people find it confusing around here?
And when I was um first starting to work
on this issue, uh what I thought the answer
was is that it's due in part certain very
specific kind of talks about Western culture that make
us find it confusing. But also, I mean, people
in Western culture and then, and then I was
totally wrong. So I um started researching this topic
with um my colleague Sean Nichols who had the
opposite guess about what was right? And I just
got completely owned it is in no way. Did
that turn out to be true? What happened instead
was that this kind of intuition that we, these
kind of intuitions that we have in in Western
culture that are pulling us in opposite directions and
confusing us and making the question seem like a
really puzzling one those arise really universally. So in
in a beautiful recent study where the first author
was Ivar Henkin, um participants were recruited from all
different places across the world and given questions about
free will. And if you look at the Western
culture, what you find is that people are very
divided. Some people say one thing, some people say
the other, it's obviously a really confusing question. And
then that exact same confusion arose in every world
region that they looked at every different continent showed
the same confusion with the same kind of percentage
of people saying one thing and saying the other
thing. So it's really like this feeling we have
that but it's confusing that it's puzzling that there's
something going wrong when we think about free will.
It's not because of something about our weird culture.
It's because of something about human way of understanding
action.
But I I mean when you mentioned there that
uh when you ask people certain questions, you get
the sense that they are a bit confused about
free will. Could you give us examples of some
of those questions just for us to get a
better sense of what we're talking about here?
Absolutely. So in one of the early studies we
did about this, we were interested in the question,
what do people think when I think about this
kind of question abstractly just like theoretically? And what
did you think about this question? And the thing
about individual cases with individual behaviors. OK. So to
address this question, we told people about this imaginary
universe, we called it universe a and we said
like, OK, imagine in this, this imaginary universe is
totally deterministic. So what that means is everything that
happens was completely caused by the thing that happened
before, which was completely caused by the thing that
happened before that it's clearly caused by the thing
that happened before that all the way back to
the very beginning of the universe. So if you
consider how things were, you know, one second after
the universe first began, that completely caused the thing
that would happen next and next and next. So
that given the way things were at the very
beginning of the universe and given the laws of
physics in this universe, you and I would have
to be having this conversation right now. It could
be like in principle predicted from the 1st, 2nd
after the universe we have. So OK, do you
understand this idea of the universe? All right, people
get this. I got. Yeah. And then we said
no, um here's a question and then were split
into two conditions in one condition. They got an
abstract question. The abstract question was, can anyone in
this universe ever be morally responsible for anything they
ever do? And an overwhelmingly participant saying no in
this universe that you described universe, a no one
can ever be more responsible for anything. It's just
not possible. Determinist the universe. That's what philosophers call
incompatible with. It's called incompatible because it's saying moral
responsibility is incompatible with determinism. Then in the other
people got a very different question. It was a
concrete question. So participants, which will imagine one guy
in that universe, a guy in universe a he
falls in love with his secretary and he wants
to like leave his wife and family for a
secretary. So he sets up an inn device in
his basement that burns down the house and kills
his own wife and Children. Is that guy more
than responsible that guy in universe A is he
morally responsible for what he did? And their participants
overwhelmingly say yes. So these are obviously like logically
inconsistent participants are saying in universe A in the
abstract, no one can ever be more responsible for
anything they do. But they're also saying that one
guy who was in universe A is totally more
responsible for this one thing that he did.
So, a and since we've been talking about moral
judgments and how they affect or influence, uh thinking
about different topics, uh The uh what uh is
it the case that what you just mentioned there
points to uh moral judgment also influencing how we
think about free will. I mean, in that particular
case, uh is, should we conclude that if people
want to blame someone, they tend to attribute free
will to their actions?
Yeah. At first I thought that was right. The
thing that you just said and then in, in
a really beautiful series of studies, Florent Cage showed
that it, it's not right. So there really is
a difference between concrete things and abstract things. So
when it's concrete, people think it's due to um
to your um uh when it's concrete, they think
that you, you're, you're responsible for it and you
do it freely and when it's abstract, I think
you don't, but it's not due to, for example,
you being really upset about the thing the person
did and really wanting to blame them. So for
example, if you start dialing down how bad it
is to something that's just kind of like feels
bad in the kind of a technical sense, but
isn't really like something that people would be outraged
by like in my example, people still think the
person is more the responsible and then coal looked
at people who have frontal temporal dementia. And so
as a result of this um disorder, they don't
feel angry at people in the same way they
normally would in cases like this and those people
have been shown to have very different judgments about
certain kinds of matters. But unless they show the
exact same pattern of judgments. So if things like
it's really something about the concreteness, it's about thinking
about an individual, human being doing an individual thing
and it's not something about um the rage that
you feel against this person who killed his own
Children
but OK, whatever it is behind it, uh we
see these occurring cross culturally. I mean, do people
tend to, when they are presented with abstract or
concrete scenarios, do they tend to think about them
in similar ways? Cross culturally.
We, we do. Yeah, it looks like we do.
So we do find in one study that participants
in the abstract think about these things in, in
a similar way cross culturally. And then we also
find in the um this isn't, so that was
in the um uh Sarkissian Nicholson, I did. And
then in the study that I just mentioned from
Heine Kanen, participants are given like a little concrete
vignette that's designed in such a way that, that
it's confusing, you know, different people say different things
in the United States. People are very divided, you
know, half the people say one thing and half
the people say another thing. And then if you
look at China, people are also very divided. If
you look at different countries in Africa, people are
also very divided there. It feels like that division
is itself something that's called that we're seeing across
many different cultures. I find they're quite striking like
that. If you think about what you might expect
to be the same across cultures, you might think
there are these things that are really fundamental to
just being able to survive in our world. Like
things like, for example, judgments about how it's appropriate
to treat your own Children or something like that,
that you could imagine in no culture would people
think it's OK to do certain terrible things to
their Children? And that would be a universal thought.
What we're seeing here is these very obscure seeming
like metaphysical questions about free will. Judgments on these
questions seem to be universal. And that, that seems
like a really puzzling phenomenon that it's the kind
of thing you might have thought would vary considerably
and that there would be no reason to expect
that you kind of be built to the nature
of our cognition to give similar judgments on questions
like those.
So uh and I mean, when it comes to
finding these universals, these human universals, when it comes
to philosophical intuitions and we're going to get into
some more of them, we talked about free will
here. Uh Do you also, are you also interested
in trying to understand where do those universals come
from? If for example, they are the result of
evolution by natural selection operating on a cognitive level
or some other thing?
Yeah. A absolutely. So we, we would absolutely want
to know why these things seem to arise across
cultures. So maybe it's too much to say these
things are universal. It's not that we would really
have evidence for that, you know, from any study.
But I think that they're surprisingly stable and you
know, a really difficult question arises as to why
they would be so stable. So maybe it would
be helpful to give an example of the kind
of thing that just feels like super weird and
kind of like just a very strange quirk, but
turns out to be surprisingly stable across cultures. So
this is an effect that was first discovered by
um Wesley Buck Walter and James Beanie. And then
these cross cultural studies were done by um mj
Kim and Yuan, y So what we Lee Buchalter
and James BB were just interested in when people
think, you know, something versus just really something, it
turns out to be true, like in the case
that I just described before, you know, so they
had the idea that maybe mortality affects it. So
here's the kind of study that they ran in
one condition, someone's the mayor of a town and
um he gets some uh has a meeting with
someone who's like, you know, one of his employees
and the employee says, ok, we've got this new
policy that we're considering and this new policy is
going to really increase campaign contributions to you. So
you're gonna make tons of money and it's also
going to bring jobs to people from the town.
And then he says, I don't really care about
bringing jobs to people in this town. All I
want to do is just get as much money
as possible for myself. So he says, to um
sign this contract that's going to adopt the policy.
So he goes in to sign the contract and
then as he's just about to sign it, the
corporation switches it for a completely different contract. So
the contract he signed is not at all the
one that he thought he was gonna sign. But
then it turned out that that other contract, the
one he really did sign, ends up bringing jobs
to people in this town. So he believed he
would bring jobs to people in town and he
did bring jobs to the people in town. Did
he know that he was gonna bring jobs to
the people in town. In that case, most people
say no, ok. Now consider another case. The assistant
comes to the mayor and says, we've got this
new policy. It's gonna make huge amounts of money
for you. So you'll get all these campaign contributions,
but it's also gonna cut jobs for people in
the town. So people in the town are gonna
really be hurt by this policy. And the they
says, I don't care about the people in the
town. I know they're gonna cut, you know, it's
gonna cut their jobs, but I don't care about
that. Let's just go ahead and, and do this.
So he goes to sign the contract and then
the corporation, he's gonna sign the contract to it
switches out for a different contract. So the one
he's signing has all different provisions says all different
stuff. But that other country does end up cutting
jobs to the town. Did he know that he
was going to cut jobs to people in the
town? In that case, people say yes, that just
feels like a really weird, like quirky thing about
our way of understanding knowledge. And then um Kim
and um Yuan studied that same thing by translating
all of these vignettes. I just gave you into
Korean and Chinese and then running them on Korean
and Chinese people. And the same thing happens among
participants in South Korea and China. So why would
that be? It? It feels like this weird thing
I just told you, it doesn't feel like we
would have evolved to have that exact quality, this
quality of making knowledge judgments based on morality. It,
I don't know if it, if it's somehow in
some way built into us innately, it must be
that somehow just the side effect or byproduct's of
other cognitive capacities we have that serve some other
use. It's very hard to see what might be
going on here. I feel like it's very puzzling
why these things we're seeing are happening across different
cultures.
OK. So they could still be the result or
a by-product of certain uh cognitive adaptations, but they
are not necessarily adaptations themselves or are not necessarily
evolved themselves.
It feels very unlikely in the case that I
just told you that human beings there was selective
pressure for making knowledge judgments in a way that's
infused by morality. I mean, that one thing doesn't
seem like it was really being selected for. It
could be that our judgments about that one thing
are the product of these cognitive processes and those
processes were selected for in some way. But those
processes also do other things that seems like it
could make sense. It could be that there's convergent
cultural evolution. It's a very complex problem to understand
why these things are so stable across cultures.
Mhm But uh I asked you as an example
about uh free will but have you or some
of your other colleagues in experimental philosophy uh studied
uh people's philosophical intuitions in general? I mean, and
if so do they tend to vary a lot
or are they stable across, for example, demographic groups
and situations?
Well, that's a wonderful question. So first of all,
obviously, the answer is that in some ways they're
stable and in some ways they're different. I mean,
we could have known that before we ran any
studies there. It's not that there's no differences ever
between cultures on anything and there's no differences I
don't know between genders on anything. And it's also
not that every single thing is totally different between
cultures and between genders and then different people have
different opinions about how to understand what, what we
actually discovered. I mean, given that we found that
some things differ and some things stay the same.
You know, what should we be struck by my
own opinion? And this is certainly a matter of
debate. Is that what we should really be struck
by is just how similar everything is that it's
not that everything stayed the same, it's not that
everything was different, but overall things were just amazingly
amazingly similar. So just to give an example, there
was a really nice paper by Edelberg Thompson and
Nus that looked at a whole bunch of different
things that people thought might differ across genders. So
these were all um uh effects that someone had
actually said in existing literature. I said this is
going to differ between men and women. And then
for all of them, I think it was maybe
21 different things or 18 different things. Some of
them like that, that they checked whether there was
a difference and it's not that they found no
differences, it's that they found one difference. So approximately
what they found is one intuitions on one thing
did differ between men and women and on the
other, you know, around 19, all of those were
the same. So that doesn't mean there are no
differences, there are differences. But overall, the message seems
to be, these things are really, really similar. And
then I feel like what, what we're seeing especially
is um if you consider certain kinds of um
moral judgments, for example, or judgments about religious things
are, are explicitly transmitted to people. Like people, like
your parents tell you about morality. Yeah. Then obviously
we get cross cultural differences on those things. So.
Mhm. So, if you grew up in Iowa or
you grew up in Brazil, you're gonna have different
judgments about morality and it's really obvious why it's
like, people are just explicitly telling you about morality.
But most things that philosophers study are things that
no one ever tells you about. Like when you're
growing up, no one ever says, you know, I
just really want you to understand that whether someone
has knowledge depends in part on whether something is
morally good or morally bad. Like then you just
kind of pick stuff up but no one ever
talks about it and on those things, the things
that no one ever talks about, we really seem
to be getting amazing degrees of sonari.
Yeah, that, that's very interesting. And I, and I
mean, another interesting question, I guess about all of
these that we've been talk about we've been talking
about is so this is about folk philosophy. But
I mean, philosophers themselves are also people. So I
mean, when it comes to uh the variation, specifically,
the variation we find across different groups of people,
do you think that by having an understanding of
what's behind that variation, we could also have a
better understanding of why professional philosophers differ in their
views of different philosophical topics? You
mean why different philosophers have different views, maybe we
can understand it. Yeah, that's a great question. So,
um the, the first answer is, I, I don't
know, I don't know the answer to the question.
And then, um there, there has been some research
that tries to get out why different philosophers have
different views and whether it has to do with
differences between the, the different philosophers and then I'll
just talk a little bit about what has been
found. So, in a really nice study by Yaden,
the result was that one result was that demographic
factors don't predict it. So different philosophers think different
stuff. I don't know about free will, about whether
morality is objective and so forth. And then different
philosophers are, you know, themselves from, from different cultures.
And so some are men, some are women, some
are non-binary like that doesn't predict their judgments. Then
a separate question was for example, whether facts but
their personalities affect their, their judgments about these things.
And overall, I would say um in the study
of philosophers, they mostly didn't. So, so facts about
like what kind of person you are have overall,
I would say very little impact on, on what
your philosophical views were but not exclusively. So for
example, if you ask professional philosophers, whether they do
drugs, so do you use recreational drugs? And then
you ask them, are there objective truths about art
like which art is better and which art is
worse? Those two things are correlated. So the more
drugs you use, the less you think there is
like objective truths about art and that seems to
be totally real. So there is no, in just
in that case, for example, certain kinds of correlations
between your personality or the kind of life you're
living in your philosophical. And then in a series
of studies that feel really funny to me, Nick
Bird was looking at um the relationship between uh
like being reflective in the sense that for example,
you can solve certain logical problems correctly and um
and having certain answers to philosophical questions, but then
this might not seem very surprising. But um if
you ask ordinary folks say, you, you just go
into like a classroom and you give everyone like
a bunch of logic puzzles and you can see
who's better, who gets the best right answer and
who gets the wrong answer. Then what you find
is that um that predicts uh judgments about certain
philosophical questions. So just as an example, um in
the case that I gave you earlier where I
was seeing like um imagine that this person who
kills his wife and family, the, the more you
um get logic, right, the more you think he's
not more responsible for what he did. OK. So
this is the weird thing that Bird discovered if
you know, run it on philosophers. So you're running
it on or philosophy professors. It still happens that
the philosophy professors who get the logic problems, right?
Tend to have different answers than the philosophy professors
who don't. So that feels like a very strange
fact. But he did find it. I, I think
that the, the, the broader answer to your question
is that I, I think as a philosopher, when
I consider these questions, like the age old questions
of philosophy that people have been discussing for thousands
of years, I feel torn, like I feel drawn
in one direction and drawn in another. And then
eventually I might make up my mind like maybe
I'm torn. But I decided on this. I think
one question you could ask is do these theories
explain why I eventually decided on this? And someone
else decides on that another question you ask, you
could ask is do these theories explain why both
of us are torn in the first place? I
think it's definitely the second, but at the very
least we're really getting some explanation of, of why
people feel confused, if not an explanation of why
different people resolve the confusion in different ways. Mhm
But I mean, do you think we should at
least expect that individual differences in cognition wherever they
stem from, would have an impact on uh philosopher's
views or not? Yeah.
Well, this in the street that I was just
talking about, it's sort of a mixed band in
that. What the study did is it looks at
a very large number of different philosophical views and
a very large number of um individual differences in
human cognition and overwhelmingly, the individual difference, variables don't
predict their philosophical views. So if you could consider
all the possible pairs, just overwhelmingly, there's no prediction.
And then if you look at most of the
philosophical views, what you find is that none of
the individual, different variables predict them. But, but even
though that's true, um we do find that some
philosophical views are predicted by some individual differences. And
the one example that I just gave was um
beliefs about what their objective truths about what's artistically
good really are predicted by something. I, I think
we might find other similar things like it, it
might be that there are some things going on.
It doesn't feel like that's gonna be like this
overwhelming thing that there's like a kind of personality
that draws you toward something or something else. Maybe
there's personalities that draw you towards certain methods. I
don't know what it will turn out to be
true.
Ok. So, uh now to also try to get
into the production of scientific knowledge and since we've
been talking about moral judgment a lot, uh do
we know if uh people's moral judgments also influence
the intuitions they hold uh in folk psychology and
moral cognition, for example. Oh,
yeah. Well, a really surprising result that we get
again and again is that um moral intuitions affect
what's called folk psychology. So, folk psychology is the
ability to just figure out what's going on in
other people's minds, like what people are. So, the
example I gave before was about the true self
that, um, when you're, whether you, what you think
is morally good or morally bad affects what you
think is going on deep down in the other
percent. But maybe the most well known, um, uh,
result I have along those lines is not, not
about the true self. It's about just whether someone
did something intentionally like did they do it on
purpose? So I'll just give you two different cases
and they're just gonna do for morally. So here's
the first case. So imagine the vice president of
a company goes to the CEO. It's OK. We've
got this new policy. It's gonna make huge amounts
of money for our company, but it's also gonna
harm the environment. And the CEO says, look, I
know it's gonna harm the environment. I don't care
at all about that. All I care about is
just making as much money as we possibly can.
So let's implement the policy. So they implement the
policy and then sure enough, it harms the environment
and the participants are asked, did the CEO do
it on purpose? Did this CEO do it intentionally?
And there are people overwhelmingly say yes, the CEO
did it intentionally if you ask them why most
participants say something like, well, he totally knew that
he was gonna harm the environment and then he
did it anyway. But we thought maybe there's something
more going on. It's not just about the knowledge.
So suppose you just changed the word harm to
help. So we're gonna leave everything else the same.
Ok. The vice president goes to the CEO and
says we've got this new policy, it's gonna make
huge amounts of money for our company and it's
also gonna help the environment. And the CEO says,
look, you know, it's gonna help the environment, but
I don't care at all about that. All I
care about is just making as much money as
we possibly can. So let's implement the policy so
they implement the policy and then sure enough, it
helps the environment. Did he help the environment? Intentionally?
Other participants overwhelmingly saying no. So thinking about those
two cases, it feels like this really weird thing
is going on that the only difference between them
is that one is about doing something bad and
one is about doing something good. The question people
are being asked isn't about like whether they deserve
blame or praise or anything like that. It's just
being asked, did they do it on purpose and
judgments of whether it's bad or good or somehow
affecting judgments about whether you did it on purpose.
And so I if moral judgments influence the intuitions
people hold when it comes to psychology, can that
also translate into the production of scientific knowledge? I
mean, can moral judgments also affect the scientists themselves.
Oh, yeah. So you mean when scientists are trying
to answer these questions, maybe they themselves are kind
of being driven. Yeah, that's a really wonderful question.
And, um, what, what we really want to know
to answer your question is like something like when
you, if you look at the actual evolution of
research programs are those research programs being driven by,
by these moral judgments? And it's very hard for
us to do that to study that question. And
the reason is it is hard to run an
experiment. Like you'd want to be like, OK, we
randomly sign different scientific research programs to different moral
statuses. But we can't do anything like that scientific
research programs just happen. However they happen, then we
can just study them. Mhm The thing that we
did and I'm not sure if this is this
might really not help to in a deeper way,
answer your question. You should just run experiments where
we ask scientists questions. So we, we um we
just had scientists and then we're asking them like,
consider this case, can you apply this concept to
this case? And then we do get effects of
morality. So I'll just give you one of these
things. So we ask people about the concept of
being innate. And then, um and then, uh we
said, um we give them different questions and then
we asked these scientists like biologists, linguists, psychologists in
these different cases is this thing in it. And
then what we do see is the effect of
morality. So, um, well, here's an example, participants were
told, imagine there's this trait, it's called trait X.
And now imagine people's genes are such that if
any, if their parents ever treat them with kindness,
then um they're gonna develop trade X. But everyone's
parents treat them with kindness at least sometimes. So
everyone develops trade X is trade X in it
and their participants tend to say yes. And now,
I mean, the person was in the other condition
were given the sy case, they were told, imagine
there's trait, it's called trade X. And people's genes
are such that if their parents are ever mean
to them, they'll develop trade act, but everyone's parents
are mean to them at least sometimes. So everyone
develops trade X is trade act in the and
their participants seem to say no about participants. I
don't mean like um just, you know, random people
on the street. I mean, these are psychologists, linguists,
biologists, people who are using this concept. So at
least in their answers to these questions, these scientists
judgments are being affected by immorality.
So I, I mean, at uh can we at
least say that um scientists are not immune to
their own moral judgments when they are producing knowledge?
Right. Yeah. Well, we can definitely say that there's
not something within the minds of the individual scientists
that makes this not have an effect. And then
the key question that we would face if we
really wanted to answer your question. And I'm not
sure if our data speak to your larger question
is not a question about what's going on in
the mind of each individual scientist, but a question
about the larger kind of social structures that allow
scientific research to progress. So it's not like um
when you're trained as a scientist, you develop some
special thing in your brain that allows you to
not have morality influence it, that is not happening.
So if there was some way that morality would
not influence things or not influence it in quite
the same way or, or have a decreased influence
or anything like that, it, it wouldn't be something
in the mind of the individual scientists. It would
have to be something in the whole way that
science is structured. Like for example, the fact that
that um you're not just seeing stuff, you're trying
to get it um published in a journal and
the peer reviewers on that journal might have different
moral judgments than you. And so you're the way
that you're gonna paper is gonna eventually turn out
is not going to be just a pure reflection
of your own moral judgments, but also of this
larger um interpersonal structure that involves people with very
different moral judgments, all kind of working together to
eventually create a series of publications that actually get
published in journals.
Mhm. No, I also asked you about that because
people today are discussing a lot, the potential effects
that, uh, moral values and political values more specifically
of, of course, the relationship between morality and politics
is not, uh, completely well under, I mean, I've
talked with political scientists and political psychologists on the
show and it's complicated to really understand what's the
real relationship between morality and politics or moral values
and political values. But anyway, people uh now uh
nowadays are discussing a lot uh the potential negative
impacts of uh certain political ideologies within academia and
so on. And I mean, I was trying to
understand if some of your work when it comes
in this case, not necessarily having to do with
politics, but more with moral judgment if it would
tell us something or have something to perhaps add
to depth discussion and to what extent we should
or shouldn't be worried about uh people's beliefs
basically. Yeah, our, our work con the work some
of the work that we've done recently contributes to
that question in a very small way. So if
you will be disappointed with a very small contribution,
we may maybe it will be helpful, maybe be
interesting. So um one question that people have often
um been troubled by is the question about the
influence of essentialism on prejudice. So the thought is
um uh people have certain kind of scientific beliefs
um by, by scientifically I don't mean, um, beliefs
of people who are scientists. I meant, like, if
you're just an ordinary person you have scientific beliefs
because I don't know, you go to high school,
you just start to develop, like, beliefs about scientific
questions. Mhm. One kind of belief that you could
have is what people sometimes call an essentialist belief.
So you could think. Um, I don't know. For
example, I, I'm Jewish and some people think, um,
there's some sort of like, um, Jewish essence that's
sort of like biological, that all Jewish people have
and differentiates them from not Jewish people. And then
it's been a real concern in our field that,
um, those beliefs, essentialist beliefs might give rise to
prejudice. The, the more you centralize a certain group,
like, for example, the more you think there's like
a Jewish essence, the more you'll be prejudiced against
that group, for example, the more you'll be anti-semitic.
So, thought that was right. Then you might think
instead of just seeing whatever we think is true
about these kind of questions regarding genetic basis of
racial groups or something like that. We have a
real reason, a, a moral reason to not say
certain things because seeing those things might increase prejudice,
increase discrimination, which I find it to be a
very plausible view. So, um, April Ba and I,
we thought that view was right. And so we,
um, we wanted to, uh, sort of build on
it and extend it in certain ways. And so
we ran a whole series of studies in which
we have manipulated the degree to which people thought
there was kind of a genetic essence of a
particular social group. And then we checked to see
whether there was a downstream effect on, on prejudice
or stereotyping. And in all of the studies, again
and again, we found the same result. So here's
what the result is. First of all, there is
a correlation between those two things. So the more
people centralize, the more they think, the more they
are prejudiced against those other groups. So in my
example, Judaism idea would be um if you looked
across a whole bunch of different people and you
measured whether they think there's like a genetic basis
of being Jewish, though the person, people who more
think there is are gonna be more anti Semitic
than the people who less think there is. The
second thing we found is that if you change
people's essentialism, like for example, we make people more
essentialist or make them less essentialist that has no
effect at all on how prejudiced they are. So
what those two things together seem to suggest is
that the causal arrow is going the other way.
So if you think about, I don't know, Hitler
was very anti Semitic and also thought there was
like this essential, essential aspect of Judi. So what
I say you could think is just for whatever
reason she just happened to think there's like this,
um, heritable genetic thing and then that caused him
to be anti Semitic. But maybe it's the other
way, it's that for whatever reason, he hated this
group of people and then he hitting this group
of people led him to think this weird stuff.
Like, so then if we could somehow make him
stop believing all of that weird stuff, like about
heritability or something, it, it wouldn't make him be
less an anti Semitic. It's only, it's the other
way. If we could make him less anti-semitic, then
it would make him less involved in this weird
stuff. So this one thing seemed to suggest it's
really going the other way. It's not that people's
scientific beliefs are having these downstream impacts on their
moral judgments. It's that people's moral judgments are having
these downstream impacts on their scientific beliefs.
That, that's, that's really fascinating. So, uh I mean,
uh yeah, because we tend to have this idea
that if people are essentialist, then that cause that
causes their uh beliefs, their discriminatory or hateful be
beliefs. But then what you're saying there is that
it could be the other way around that people
already have those beliefs and then uh that would
cause them to be essentially sort, we centralize certain
groups of people.
Yeah, that's the result we're getting, we very much
expected it to be the other way, the way
that you said. But I don't confirm what we
thought, like, it really feels like. Yeah, if, if
we took some very racist people and all we
did was say, um, you know, here's some interesting
results about genetics or something like that and then
suppose that they were very convinced they were like,
oh, yeah, I really appreciate all this genetic information.
Sound. That sounds totally right. That wouldn't make them
less racist. It's just, it's, it's like, that's not
the thing that would actually change the, the degree
to which they're doing racist things.
Yeah, that's very interesting. So, uh I have a
couple of more questions uh now regarding how people
understand truth itself, so does the way people interact
socially? I mean, if they are cooperating or competing,
more influence how they comes through truth in terms
of subjectivity or objectivity.
Yeah, this really relates to the topic we were
talking about a really long time ago, we were
talking about whether people think there even is an
objective, the right answer to a question. So in
these studies with Matthew Fisher, we had participants randomly
assigned to two groups. So in one group, they
were told, OK, you're gonna talk with someone who
has the opposite opinion of you on some, on
this topic. So um for example, if you're pro
choice, this other person will be pro-life or if
you're in favor of the death penalty, this other
person will be opposed to the death penalty. And
then, and they really are talking, they really are
engaged in this discussion with this other person. They're
doing it on the internet, like through this kind
of chat service. And then in one group we
said, um, so what you have to do is
like, win the argument. Like, um this other person
is gonna argue, say for the pro life position,
you have to like beat them and, and win
for the um pro choice position. But in the
other condition, he said, um this other person has
the opposite view of you. And we want you
to like, try to understand this other person and
for you and this other person to kind of
corporate to each understand where the other one is
coming from. Like why do they think the things
they do? Like what's their perspective and so forth?
So then participants um are just like having a
conversation where they're like writing back and forth to
each other in this way, either to defeat the
other or to um understand the other. And then
after silver, then we ask the kind of question
we talked about earlier, is there really a truth
about this question? So say about the abortion question,
is there really a right answer between pro life
and portraits? And what we find is that the
more you're in a competitive interaction where you're trying
to like defeat the other person, the more you
think there is an objective answer. And when you're
in a co-operative interaction. We're trying to understand the
other person, the more you think there isn't even
a correct.
And so with that in mind, uh my last
question will be then can politics and specifically political
polarization change our understanding of truth?
That's a great question. I, I don't know the
answer to your question, but I'm even though I
don't know, I'm just gonna make a, make a
guess. So, um right now, what we find is
that um uh well, there's a correlation that the,
the more people are divided about some question, the
more people think there's no objectively right answer to
it. So, um if you ask, is there a
right answer about whether murder is morally wrong? People
think there is, if you ask is the right
answer about whether abortion is morally wrong. People tend
to think that there's not. And then, although we
don't have any data to suggest this, my guess
is that that effect arises because people are able
to think about people on the opposite side of
this issue in a certain way, they're able to
like kind of take the perspective of the that
person and care about that person and so forth.
But if polarization continues to grow, so that we're
really forming almost like two nations where people never
interact with each other and never talk with each
other. They don't even care whether the other person
likes them and they're just each talking with people
on their own side of the aisle and not
connecting with people. Not yet. My guess would be
that it will gradually change. And this tendency that
we see right now, if people say maybe that
person isn't actually wrong, maybe there's no truth of
the matter that will decrease and then people will
start to see there's only one truth and it's
our truth. We're the ones who are right and
most people are.
Ok, great. So, uh Josh, just before we go,
would you like to tell people where they can
find you and your work on the internet?
Oh, I don't know. I mean, uh wait, that's
a great question. You, I guess maybe you, I
mean, you could just go to my website but
that might not be much fun. Maybe a fun
thing to do would be if you look up
experimental philosophy on, on youtube, you can find uh
videos of that are explaining different experimental philosophy studies
and that's sort of where people are acting out
these little stories that I just told you and
that might be much more enjoyable.
OK, great. So, thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
real fun to talk
to you. Thank you so much. I really appreciate
this. Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview
until the end. If you liked it, please do
not forget to like it, share, comment and subscribe
and if you like more generally what I'm doing,
please consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal.
You have all of the links in the description
of this interview. The show is brought to you
by En Lights learning and development. Done differently. Check
their website at alights.com. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters per Larson Jerry Mueller and Frederick
Sunda Bernards, all of election and Weser, Adam Castle
Matthew Whitting Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric,
Alania John Connors, Philip Forst Connelly, Robert Winde Ruin.
Nai Zoup, Mark Nevs Colin Hall, Simon Columbus, Phil,
Kavana, Michael Stormer, Samuel Andrea Francis for the AGD
Alexander Dan Bauer, Fergal, Ken Hall, Herzog Michel, Jonathan
Lit Jars and the Samuel Correa, Eric Heins, Mark
Smith, Jan We Amal S Franz, David Sloan Wilson,
Ya De Roma Roach, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli
Nicole. Bear, Adam and Pao Assy Naw Guy Madison
Gary G Hallman, Samo Zal Arien Y, Nick Golden
Paul Talent in John Bar was Julian Price Edward
Hall Eden Bronner, Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lotti Gabriel
Pan Cortez, Lelis Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny
Smith, John Wiesman, Martin Ackland, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul George Arnold Luke Lo A George the off
Chris Williamson, Peter Lawson, David Williams the Costa, Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw and Murray Martinez Le
Chevalier bangalore atheists, Larry Daley Junior Holt Eric B.
Starry Michael Bailey then Sperber, Robert Grassy Rough the
RP MD. Ior Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas, Radix,
Mark Campbell, Richard Bowen Thomas, the Dauber Luke Ne
and Chris story Manuel Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson and Benjamin
Gilbert. A special thanks to my producers, these our
web gem Frank Luca, Tom Weam Bernard Ni Ortiz
Dixon, Benedict Mueller Vege, Gli Thomas Trumble, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Robert Lewis and Al
Nick Ortiz. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si Adrian and Bogdan Kut. Thank you for all.